What if I told you that the concept of progress, you know, and the evolution of life, and the steady march of scientific discovery, and even in the, like, the biological engineering of your own body, is a complete mathematically provable illusion?
Welcome to the deep dive. Today, we are basically taking a sledgehammer to how you view reality.
Yeah, it is quite the paradigm shift, honestly. I mean, we spend our entire lives deeply comforted by this idea of trajectories. We really want to believe that the universe, or, well, at least our little corner of it, is optimizing towards something better.
Right. It's that invisible ladder we all think we're climbing. You look at a biology textbook, and the history of life on Earth feels like this relentless story of improvement, right?
Yeah.
From single-celled organisms all the way up to, and you look at an intricate organ, like the human eye, and it seems so perfectly, meticulously engineered for a really specific job. And then you look at human knowledge, the whole history of science, and it feels like a steady, cumulative mountain climb toward absolute objective truth. We love this narrative. We need things to have a purpose, I think. We want to be aimed at a goal.
Which is exactly why the material we are dissecting today is so beautifully disruptive. Because when you truly examine the mathematics of how physical systems persist over time, that comforting ladder entirely vanishes.
Wow.
The universe isn't a sculptor slowly chipping away at a block of marble to reveal perfection. It is, mathematically speaking, just a giant, mindless sieve.
Okay, let's unpack this, because we are getting into some profoundly mind-bending territory today. Our grounding text for this deep dive is a wildly fascinating independent research pager.
It really is.
It's titled, Selection Without Design, Constraint, Projection, and the Geometry of the Unseen. Written by an author who goes by the name...
Our mission today is to take those three deeply held narratives you just mentioned, that evolution is an optimizer, that our biological systems have an intrinsic functional purpose, and that our knowledge is converging on absolute truth, and will completely deconstruct them.
Break them right down to the studs.
Exactly. And then, we are going to rebuild them from the ground up, using Fluxium's framework of dynamical systems and mathematical constraints.
But before we jump into the deep end, I want to establish a really crucial baseline for you listening right now.
Now, this paper isn't some cynical exercise in nihilism. We aren't sitting here saying nothing matters, or nothing is real.
Right, it's not just pure skepticism.
Far from it. This is about attempting to see the underlying mechanics of existence. The paper describes it as the geometry of the unseen. It's an exploration of the invisible constraints that dictate everything we are and everything we can ever know.
So it's more about the hidden rules of the game.
Yeah. If you could visualize the space we are entering today, don't picture a biology lab or a telescope. Picture a stark, vast, abstract, geometric arena filled with interlocking, multidimensional paths and rigid, unbreakable boundaries.
That sounds intense.
That is a phase space. That is the true arena of a dynamical system.
I love that visual. A giant, dark room full of invisible tripwires. Let's actually start right there at the biological level and look at the tripwires of natural selection.
If you open any standard high school biology textbook, the story of evolution is basically pitched to us as an engineering problem.
It's always an engineering problem.
Always. The classic metaphor we are taught is the fitness landscape. Imagine a massive 3D topographical map where the towering peaks represent high evolutionary fitness and the deep valleys represent low fitness.
We are taught that populations of animals are constantly climbing these mountains, guided by the invisible hand of natural selection toward the summit.
Which implies an active guide.
Right. Mother nature is basically looking at a menu of genetic mutations and saying, ah, yes, thicker fur is objectively better for this wolf. Let's optimize for that.
The fitness landscape is probably one of the most successful yet deeply misleading metaphors in the entire history of science.
Flyxion completely dismantles it right out of the gate.
So how does the paper take it down?
The core argument of the paper is that natural selection does not optimize. At all. It simply filters.
To understand the difference, we have to look at what is mathematically required to have an actual optimization process.
Okay. Lay it on me.
You need three distinct things. First, you need a space of possibilities.
Second, you need an objective function. This is a mathematical rule that assigns a value or a score to every single state in that space.
Like a grading rubric.
Exactly like a rubric.
And third, you need a directed search mechanism, something that actively pulls or steers the system toward the states with the highest scores.
Right. Like a GPS routing algorithm. It knows the ultimate goal, you know, getting me to the grocery store. It scores all the possible street routes based on time and traffic. And then it actively directs me down the route with the best score.
That is a perfect example of an optimizer. Natural selection, however, lacks the second and third components.
Huh?
There is no biological objective function and there is no directed search mechanism.
None at all.
None. The variations that arise in biology through random genetic mutation, chromosomal recombination, or just, you know, developmental noise, they are not guided by the fitness landscape.
A wolf doesn't mutate thicker fur because it's cold.
The mutations are just blind.
Entirely blind to the environment.
Selection then enters the picture, but it doesn't steer the wolf toward a peak. It merely applies a boundary condition. It says, well, if you freeze to death, you are excluded.
Exclusion. That's the sieve.
That is the sieve.
Organisms that fail to survive and reproduce just don't contribute to the next generation.
That does not mean the ones that survived were optimized. It strictly means they weren't destroyed.
Let me try an analogy here to see if I'm really wrapping my head around this.
Yeah.
Imagine a massive, chaotic game show. You have a thousand contestants running around a giant arena in pitch blackness.
Okay. I like where this is going.
And the floor is randomly dropping out. Just massive trap doors opening up everywhere without warning, shifting based on completely random external factors.
The people left standing at the end of the game, the people left standing at the end of the game aren't the best dancers.
No.
They aren't the smartest trivia players. They aren't the fastest runners.
They're literally just the people who happened to be standing on a solid piece of floor when the surrounding pieces fell away.
They literally just didn't fall through a hole.
I think we need to push that analogy even further to really capture the math.
It's not just that the floor is dropping.
It's that the contestants themselves are constantly mutating, changing their shapes, tying their shoelaces together, or randomly jumping.
Right. They're mutating blindly while the floor drops.
Yes. If a contestant blindly stumbles to the left just as the trap door opens on the right, they survive.
To look at that surviving player, who might be a terrible runner with tied shoelaces, and declare,
this player is the optimal human for this game, requires you to project a narrative of progress that the game itself absolutely does not possess.
The game doesn't care about their shoelaces.
The game only cares that they didn't fall.
Because the game doesn't have a scoring system. It only has an eliminated or not eliminated binary.
Which brings us to the formal mathematical structure of persistence that Flyxion introduces. It's called the closure condition.
The closure condition. Okay, let's break that down.
In dynamical systems theory, you define a set of states. Let's call that set S.
For that set to persist through time, it simply has to map into itself indefinitely under the rules of the system.
Map into itself.
Yeah. In mathematical notation, T of S, the transformation of the state over time, must remain a subset of S.
So, the states just keep producing new states that are still inside the safe zone.
Yeah.
Like, the players keep stepping on floorboards that haven't dropped.
Yes. It is just a dynamic loop that avoids breaking.
The paper introduces two rigorous mathematical lemmas here to separate this idea of persistence from our very human obsession with optimality.
What are lemmas?
Let's look at lemma 2.5.
It proves that just because a system persists, there is absolutely no guarantee it is moving toward a higher score on any metric you could possibly invent.
So, it could be getting worse by our standards, but still surviving?
Exactly. As long as it doesn't cross the boundary of destruction, a system can actually drift from states you might consider better or fitter to states you consider worse.
Because there's no force pulling it up the mountain. It's just wandering aimlessly on the plateau.
And then lemma 2.6 proves the flip side, which is even more devastating to the optimization narrative.
It proves that you can have a state that perfectly, flawlessly maximizes your objective function, the absolute best possible state of biological fitness you could ever imagine.
Like the ultimate, perfectly evolved organism.
Right. But, if the dynamics of the system don't map that state back into itself, if, in the very next time step, it steps outside the boundary of the safe zone, it is instantaneously destroyed.
Oh, wow. So, perfection can be fatal.
Optimality does not guarantee persistence, and persistence does not equal optimality.
They are mathematically orthogonal concepts. They have nothing to do with each other.
But, hold on. I remember taking evolutionary biology in college, and there are incredibly complex mathematical equations that professors use to prove that populations do, in fact, optimize over time.
The classic defenses of progress.
Yeah. People always bring up the Price equation, or Ronald Fisher's Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection.
These are foundational pillars of mathematical biology.
Does Fluxium just, you know, ignore a century of science?
Not at all. Fluxium tackles them head-on to demonstrate how we, as a scientific community, have structurally misinterpreted them.
Okay, let's take the Price equation first. How is that misinterpreted?
Well, George Price developed this in the 1970s, and it is a breathtakingly brilliant, exact mathematical description of evolutionary change from one generation to the next.
But Fluxium points out a glaring philosophical blind spot in how it's taught.
The Price equation relies on measuring the covariance between a specific treat and fitness.
Covariance. Okay, for those of us who haven't taken statistics recently, covariance is just how two things change together, right?
Like, the taller you are, the higher you can reach in an apple tree.
Height and apple-gathering coverage.
That's a very intuitive way to grasp it.
The Price equation measures how a trait changes based on its local, instantaneous correlation with reproductive success.
Local and instantaneous.
Plus any transmission biases, like mutation.
But here is the critical catch.
It is purely a local accounting mechanism.
It has absolutely no reference to an external standard against which a trait is being optimized globally.
I see. It only tells you what happened in that single momentary transition between yesterday and today.
So it's a photograph, not a feature film.
That's a great way to put it.
It's just a snapshot of the sieve at work.
It tells you which traits happen to be correlated with not falling through the trap door in that specific round of the game.
It does not imply a global teleological trajectory towards some independent ideal of improvement.
Okay, what about Fisher's Fundamental Theorem?
That one literally has the word fundamental in it.
That sounds pretty definitive.
Fisher's Theorem is equally misunderstood.
It asserts that the rate of increase in the mean fitness of any organism at any time is equal to its genetic variance in fitness at that time.
And people read that and think, well, fitness is always going up.
Exactly. Decades of biologists have read that and thought, aha, mean fitness is always increasing.
Evolution is an engine of optimization.
But Flyxion points out the fine print.
There's always fine print.
The theorem only applies to the additive genetic variance in fitness holding the environment completely static.
But the environment is never static. Ever.
Never. The moment the population evolves, the moment the climate shifts slightly, the moment a predator adapts or a prey species gets slightly faster, the entire landscape deforms.
So the mountain moves.
Fisher's Theorem is describing a local momentary tendency on a landscape that is constantly melting and reforming beneath the organism's feet.
Right. You aren't climbing a mountain to the top. You are just desperately trying to keep your head above the water in a chaotic, churning ocean.
There is no global optimum to reach.
Exactly.
Okay, so if we aren't being optimized, right, if we are truly just the lucky, stumbling contestants who didn't fall through the trapdoors, why do biological systems look so breathtakingly designed?
The illusion of design is very powerful.
It is. Why does the human eye have a lens of people and a retina that work in perfect mechanical harmony?
Why do cellular enzymes perfectly lock into their substrates like a key in a vault?
I mean, it screams design.
It feels cognitively impossible to accept that this is just the result of a blind sieve.
Which naturally leads us to question the origin of that illusion.
To answer your question about the eye and the enzyme, we have to unpack a statistical concept that Flyxion calls conditional inflation.
Conditional inflation. Let's break that down.
Imagine setting up a mathematical probability space of all the possible chemical trajectories that could have occurred on earlier.
We're talking about trillions of random molecular interactions, bubbling in hydrothermal vents and tide pools, happening every single second over millions of years.
A massive soup of possibilities.
The vast, overwhelming majority of those chemical trajectories lead absolutely nowhere.
They fizzle out. They degrade into inert sludge. They fail to form anything stable.
We, standing here today, only observe the infinitesimally tiny fraction of trajectories that did not terminate.
Because our very existence as conscious observers depends entirely on being the end product of a persistent system, we are sampling from a highly filtered, maximally biased data set.
Survivor bias. We are the survivors, looking backward through a multi-billion-year-old filter.
Precisely. Flyxion formally states this as Proposition 3.1.
If the strict constraints required to survive the chemical and biological sieve happen to correlate with things like mechanical complexity or metabolic efficiency or finely tuned enzymes,
then when we look back, we will see a universe positively brimming with complexity and efficiency.
Because all the simple, fragile stuff died.
Exactly. We then make a massive, deeply flawed, logical leap.
We falsely assume that the generative process, the universe itself, was actively aiming to produce that complexity.
Oh, man. It's like looking at incredibly successful startup founders.
You read their autobiographies or you watch their TED Talk, and they weave this perfect linear story of genius.
First, I optimized my code, then I strategically pivoted my market fit, and it was all a brilliant, deliberate design from day one.
They always say that.
Right. But if you actually look at the data of early-stage venture capital, most of it was just throwing spaghetti at the wall.
They were just trying desperately not to run out of money before the end of the month.
They didn't perfectly design the company.
They just accidentally stumbled into a configuration that didn't go bankrupt during a market crash.
That is a phenomenal analogy.
And then, because they survived, we put them on magazine covers, we look at their specific traits, you know, waking up at 4 a.m., drinking green juice, micromanaging their staff,
and we assume those traits are the universal objective formula for optimization.
We completely ignore the graveyard of 10,000 other founders who also woke up at 4 a.m. and drank green juice, but hit a bad market constraint and vanished.
That is a perfect example of conditional inflation in human behavior.
We inflate the conditional expectation of success based purely on the traits of the survivors,
and Flyxion applies this exact same rigorous logic to the origin of life itself.
How so.
The text forces us to abandon the romantic idea that life began with a heroic, optimized discovery of some magical, self-replicating DNA molecule.
The origin of life was, frankly, a sloppy chemical accident.
I love that phrase, a sloppy chemical accident, like a wobbly, mismatched IKEA table held together by duct tape.
And we're assuming a master carpenter spent 10 years designing it.
Explain the actual biology of this accident.
Flyxion leans on the work of theoretical biologist Stuart Kaufman here, specifically his concept of autocatalytic sets.
Autocatalytic sets.
The idea is that you do not need a perfectly optimized, high-fidelity replicator to kickstart life.
You just need a messy network of chemical reactions that achieve what Flyxion terms mutual admissibility.
Mutual admissibility.
So they just allow each other to exist.
Exactly.
Molecule A accidentally helps catalyze the creation of molecule B. Molecule B happens to help create molecule C.
And molecule C just so happens to catalyze molecule A.
On a closed loop.
A closed loop.
Now, none of these molecules are optimizing anything.
The cycle might be incredibly inefficient.
It might be energetically wasteful.
It might leak resources constantly.
But it satisfies the closure condition.
T-gas is a subset of S.
You're hitting on the exact mathematical core of the paper.
They collectively catalyze their own production just enough to not get destroyed by the temperature or the pH levels or the UV radiation of their surrounding environment.
They just found a safe corner to hide in.
They blindly stepped into the admissible region of the dynamical system.
And because their structure formed a loop, they simply stayed there.
So life didn't begin because it was good at anything.
It began because it just managed to not fail the exclusion criteria.
Right.
But wait.
As we look at the fossil record, we do see organisms getting more complex.
Brains get bigger.
Nervous systems get more intricate.
Does that mean optimization kicks in later in the game?
It is so tempting to think so.
But no.
It just means that more complex networks don't exist because they are better in some absolute objective sense.
They exist because a wider, more complex web of interconnected reactions is simply harder to break.
Oh.
It's about robustness, not optimization.
Yes.
If you have a simple chemical cycle with only three steps and the temperature of the pond drops slightly, the cycle might break and banish forever.
It's too fragile.
But if you have a massively complex cycle with three million interlocking steps, redundant pathways, and feedback loops, it can absorb more environmental shocks.
It maintains its admissibility across a much wider range of chaotic conditions.
So the complex systems aren't climbing higher on a mountain.
They are just building wider, flatter bases so they don't tip over.
Yes.
Over deep time, fragility is continually excluded by the sieve.
Robustness simply persists.
It mimics optimization beautifully, but it is just the natural mathematical consequence of the fact that robust closure is less likely to fall through the trapdoor.
This is so paradigm shifting.
In a weird, existential way, it takes the pressure off.
I mean.
Well, how often do you as a listener look at your own successful habits or a relationship that works and assume it had to be optimally designed from the start?
We beat ourselves up trying to find the optimal morning routine, the optimal diet, the optimal career path.
But maybe the universe doesn't care about optimal.
Maybe you just need to find a sloppy loop that keeps you in the game.
You just need mutual admissibility with your environment.
That is a highly practical human translation of theorem 4.2 in the paper.
Selection without optimization.
The set of persistent structures contains absolutely no reference to an objective function.
Any ranking we impose on ourselves or on biology is just that, an external imposition.
Which perfectly bridges us into the next major pillar of this text, the projection of purpose.
This is where things get really controversial in philosophical circles.
Because if biology isn't actively optimizing toward a goal, what happens to the whole idea of purpose itself?
If we zoom in from the evolution of an entire species down to the specific organs inside your body or the thoughts firing inside your brain, right now we use the language of purpose constantly.
We do.
We say the purpose of a heart is to pump blood.
The purpose of a kidney is to filter waste.
This is a massive concept in philosophy called functionalism, isn't it?
It is the dominant paradigm.
Functionalism is the idea that what a thing is, is entirely determined by what it does.
Its causal role defines its existence.
It's incredibly popular in both the philosophy of biology and the philosophy of mind.
So it's all about the job it performs.
A functionalist argues that it doesn't matter what a heart is made of.
It could be made of biological meat, it could be made of 3D printed plastic, or it could be made of titanium.
As long as it pumps blood through a system, it is a heart.
It feels rigorous.
It aligns perfectly with how human engineers talk.
And it seems to escape the trap of optimization because it's just describing a system's current mechanical role.
But if I'm tracking with Lickshin's logic, this paper is going to tear functionalism down to the studs too.
Completely.
Lickshin encounters the entire functionalist project with Proposition 6.1, the underdetermination of function by dynamics.
Underdetermination.
We throw that word around a lot in science.
Break down exactly what it means in this context.
It means that the pure physical dynamics of a system, the raw mathematical facts of how the particles move and interact,
do not contain enough information to tell you what its function is.
Let's look at your heart.
Mathematically speaking, a persistent structure like a heart has an infinite number of invariant regularities.
Regularities, like things it does consistently.
Yes.
Pumping blood is certainly one regularity.
But the heart also produces rhythmic thumping sounds.
It adds exactly a certain amount of mass to your chest cavity.
It generates a highly specific measurable electromagnetic field.
It produces a minor amount of thermal heat.
From the objective perspective of the pure dynamical system, all of these regularities are completely equal.
The closure condition, the loop that keeps you alive, preserves all of them simultaneously.
The raw physics of the universe does not privilege the blood pumping over the sound making.
But wait, let me push back here.
If you cut out my heart, I die.
The thumping sound isn't what keeps my brain oxygenated.
The pumping of the blood is mechanically keeping me alive.
How can you say they are dynamically equal?
Because you are defining keeping you alive based on the coupled constraint of your specific environment and the rest of your body's architecture.
Yes, if you remove the blood flow, the larger system fails.
But if you were a predator that hunted by detecting the electromagnetic feel of a heartbeat, the electromagnetic regularity would be the dynamically relevant factor for your survival.
Oh, I see.
The heart doesn't know it's a blood pumper.
The universe doesn't have a sticky note on the heart that says primary function, fluid dynamics.
Look, she actually writes this brilliantly.
Let me read this sentence from the text.
To call a dynamical regularity a function is not to discover a fact about the system, but to impose a privileged coordinate frame upon it.
Wow.
Okay, I see it.
It's like looking at constellations in the night sky.
The stars are physically there.
There are balls of burning gas persisting in a vacuum.
Their relative positions to each other are invariant regularities.
But the Big Dipper is not an intrinsic property of the universe.
Exactly.
The Big Dipper is a projection that human beings impose based on our highly specific vanish point on Earth and our cultural desire to see patterns in the noise.
That analogy perfectly captures Flyxion's argument.
To single out the blood pumping and declare the true function requires an observer to lay a privileged coordinate system over the raw behavior.
It is an observer-imposed projection.
And Flyxion uses this exact vulnerability to dismantle two major philosophical schools that try to save functionalism.
Okay, let's hear them.
Who are we debunking first?
The first is teleological functionalism.
Thinkers in this camp, like Wright and Neander, argue that we can solve the thumping sound versus plumping blood problem by looking at evolutionary history.
Looking backwards to find purpose.
Right.
They say, sure, the heart does many things.
But the reason it was selected for, in our ancestors, was because it pumped blood, not because it made noise.
Therefore, pumping blood is its true biological proper function.
It sounds like a solid argument.
Does it get them out of the trap?
It fails because it smuggles the illusion of optimization back in through the back door.
Claiming a traits function is what it was selected for historically implies a retrospective, normative judgment.
It assumes Mother Nature was tracking a gradient and aiming for a goal.
But, as we established with our game show analogy, selection doesn't track gradients.
It just excludes what falls through the trap door.
In the ancestral environment, pumping blood, making a thumping sound, and having a certain mass were all bundled together in one organism that simply happened to survive.
They all coveried.
The sieve of selection didn't point a finger at the ancestor and say,
I choose you specifically for your fluid dynamics.
It just didn't kill the bundle.
Ugh.
So, picking the blood pumping as the historical reason is still just us, right now in the present, projecting our own engineering interests backward in time onto a blind process.
Exactly.
It's a retrospective projection.
The universe still didn't care.
And then, Flyxion goes after the second major school, computational functionalism.
Okay, I know this one.
This is huge in cognitive science, computer science, and the entire debate around artificial intelligence.
With thinkers like Putnam and Fodor.
Right.
The idea here is that mental states, like having a thought or feeling pain, are defined purely by their computational role.
The classic example is multiple realizability.
A human brain made of wet, carbon-based neurons and a computer chip made of dry, silicon transistors can supposedly do the exact same computation.
Therefore, the argument goes, they can possess the exact same mental state.
They both can have a belief that it's raining outside because the functional output is identical.
That is the core of it.
Computational functionalism argues that function is about abstract equivalence classes.
If two completely different physical states occupy the same causal role in a flow chart, they are functionally equivalent.
But, Flyxion uses a dense mathematical concept called dynamical conjugacy, formalized in definition 8.1, to show why this is fundamentally flawed.
Dynamical conjugacy.
Okay, that sounds intense.
Let's try to ELI-5 that.
Explain it like I'm 5.
Dynamical conjugacy is basically the rigorous mathematics of mapping one system onto another.
If you want to say a human brain and a silicon AI chip are doing the same computation, you have to create a mathematical map.
You have to draw lines connecting the physical states of the squishy brain to the physical states of the rigid chip.
Making a one-to-one translation.
But Proposition 8.2 in the text proves that for any persistent system, there are multiple, totally non-equivalent ways to draw those lines.
So there isn't just one valid map.
Right.
You could map the silicon chip to the brain in a way that perfectly aligns their mathematical logic gates, but you could also, with equal mathematical validity, map them in a way that aligns their sheet dissipation over time.
Or you could map them based on their electron mass distribution.
And neither map is objectively the true one from the universe's perspective.
Let's push an analogy here.
It's like taking a map of New York City and a map of London and deciding they are functionally the same city because you chose to only map the geographic locations of Starbucks coffee shops.
That's hilarious.
But it makes sense.
Yes.
Under that specific, highly restrictive projection, they might look structurally equivalent.
But if you chose to map the underground sewer pipes instead, they would look entirely different.
That equivalence isn't an intrinsic, glowing property of the cities themselves.
It's a direct result of your highly selective mapping choice.
So wait, I want to pause here because this is getting heavy.
Are you saying my brain doesn't actually process information?
Are functions completely fake?
Are we saying nothing actually does anything?
No, and no, and this is a vital distinction to make so we don't fall into total absurdity.
Flyxion is not an eliminativist.
The paper isn't arguing that functions are hallucinations or that your heart doesn't pump blood.
It is saying that functional descriptions are exactly like coordinate systems in physics.
Like latitude and longitude lines on a globe.
Exactly like that.
Latitude and longitude are incredibly real, mathematically rigorous, and undeniably useful.
You can use them to successfully navigate a cargo ship across the Pacific Ocean.
They describe real physical geometry.
But latitude and longitude lines do not exist as glowing red grids drawn on the physical dirt of the Earth.
Right.
They are a geometric projection made by an observer.
Different observers say aliens visiting Earth could use an entirely different grid system
based on magnetic poles or tidal forces, and both systems would be perfectly valid.
So the function depends on the scale and the interest of whoever is looking.
Yes.
Look at a specific protein in your body.
At the molecular level, an observer would say its function is its catalytic activity.
Zoom out to the cellular level, and an observer says its function is part of a signaling pathway.
Zoom out to the organism level, and the doctor says its function is maintaining homeostasis.
And none of them are wrong.
All of these coordinate systems are real.
All of them are usable.
But none of them is intrinsically the true primitive ontology of the universe.
Functions are simply what an observer sees when they drape a coordinate system over a persistent structure.
That is a massive, dizzying paradigm shift.
Yeah.
Because if functions, if the very purpose of a thing require an observer to project a coordinate system onto it,
that forces us to turn the microscope around.
It does.
It forces us to ask, who exactly is the observer?
Are we standing outside the universe drawing these lines?
What are our limits?
And that realization propels us into part three of the text, the embedded observer and structural blind spots.
This is where the paper moves from biology into deep epistemology, the study of knowledge itself.
The classic scientific ideal, and honestly the way most of us intuitively go through our daily lives,
treats the observer as a god looking down on a chessboard.
Yes.
We think we are outside the system, objectively tallying up the pieces from a sterile, unconstrained vantage point.
Right.
It's the scientist in the pristine white coat, separated from the messy bacteria in the petri dish by a thick pane of glass.
But Flyxion mathematically proves that this is a physical impossibility.
The observer is not a god.
The observer is a physical subsystem entirely inside the dynamical field.
We are part of the mess.
You are made of atoms, you are subject to the same laws of physics,
and crucially, you are bound by the exact same closure conditions we talked about in biology.
T of S must be a subset of S.
Yes.
Or, more specifically for an observer, T of Aux must be a subset of Aux.
The observer must persist in order to observe.
If you don't survive, you can't measure anything.
And because the observer is just a small subset of the whole universe,
their domain is necessarily mathematically smaller than the whole state space.
Okay, so, we aren't the player moving the chess pieces.
We are a pawn on the chess board, trying to understand the rules of the game,
while simultaneously trying not to get captured.
That's a great way to frame it.
And because we are embedded inside the game,
our observation is structurally limited by the rules of our own physical movement.
Flyxion breaks down the geometry of observation into a few key mathematical concepts.
And the first one is the reachable set, denoted mathematically as R.
The reachable set.
What does that actually mean for me, sitting here right now?
It is the specific finite set of physical states that you, as an observer,
can actually physically visit based on your initial conditions and constraints.
The physical limits.
Think about the physical reality of your existence.
You were born in a specific year.
You live on a specific rocky planet.
You are equipped with a highly specific limited sensory apparatus.
You can only see a tiny sliver of the electromagnetic spectrum.
You can only move forward in time.
My trajectory is locked.
Your physical trajectory through the vast space of the universe is severely rigidly restricted.
Therefore, there are parts of the universe, parts of the state space that you will simply never, ever reach.
Not because you don't have a good enough telescope or because you haven't invented warp drive yet,
but because your physical dynamics fundamentally do not intersect with them.
I love this concept.
It's like exploring a massive open world video game.
You're playing this sprawling RPG and you open the map and there are huge sections of the continent that are completely grayed out in a fog of war.
Right.
But here is the terrifying kicker.
They aren't grayed out because you haven't solved the puzzle to unlock them yet.
They are grayed out because your character's base code physically prevents them from rendering there.
The physics engine of your avatar simply does not allow access to that geometry.
That is exactly what the reachable set is.
Now combine that fog of war with the second concept, the observation map, which Flyxion denotes with the Greek letter pi.
Pi.
This concept deals with the fact that biological and mechanical observation is fundamentally lossy.
It is a mathematical process called a non-injective mapping.
Non-injective, let's translate that, lossy compression, like a blurry JPEG.
Essentially, yes.
In a non-injective map, multiple entirely distinct states of the real world can produce the exact same measurement on your instruments or on your retina.
Right.
Like how a gigantic, raging, supergent star millions of light years away looks exactly the same as a tiny little firefly buzzing right in front of my face on a dark night.
Perfect example.
Two totally different, wildly unequal states of physical reality.
But the single photon hitting my eye creates the exact same visual measurement in my brain.
A point of light.
Precisely.
In mathematical terms, the set of all the possible realities that could produce your specific measurement is called a fiber.
So when you observe that point of light, you have a fiber of possible truths.
It could be a star, it could be a firefly, it could be a laser pointer.
But here is where the concept of the embedded observer changes everything.
You don't actually have to guess among all possible realities in the universe.
You only have to guess among the realities that exist inside your epistemically accessible fiber.
Yes.
Epistemically accessible fiber.
That sounds like a horribly dry, high fiber cereal you buy at a health food store.
Break down what that means.
Epistemic just refers to knowledge.
So this is the set of truths you can actually know.
It is the mathematical intersection of what you measure the fiber and what is physically reachable for you, your reachable set.
Okay.
So where the two overlap.
This intersection leads us to one of the most sobering conclusions in the paper, which Flyxion formalizes as theorem 11.2, the lifting problem.
The lifting problem.
Let me guess, this isn't about gym routines.
No, no.
When you make a measurement, you are trying to lift that localized observation up to correctly guess the true global state of the universe that caused it.
But because you are permanently confined inside your reachable set, there are what the paper calls structurally unavailable explanations.
There are absolute concrete truths about the universe, real physical states that would perfectly explain your observation that you can never, ever access.
No matter how good your science gets, no matter how rigorous your logic is, you are structurally barred from them because your reachable set simply never intersects with them.
So it's not just a matter of, we need to build a bigger particle accelerator or we need to launch a better space telescope.
No, technology won't fix it.
It's a fundamental mathematical law that our physical trajectory through the cosmos absolutely excludes certain truths from our reality.
We are trying to solve a jigsaw puzzle where half the pieces don't just happen to be lost under the couch.
They are mathematically forbidden from existing in our dimension.
That is, well, honestly, it's terrifying.
It induces a kind of epistemic vertigo.
It is a profound structural underdetermination.
It forces us to realize that our truth is bounded by our survival.
But here's where it gets really interesting and where the math gives us a glimmer of hope.
Let's move into the concept of epistemic curvature and what the paper calls the dark matter of truth.
Because if there are truths that are structurally barred from us, are we just totally blind to them?
Is it just a massive, impenetrable brick wall of ignorance?
Not necessarily.
And this is where Flyxion's geometry of the unseen becomes incredibly beautiful.
The paper introduces the concept of inaccessible, persistent regions.
Inaccessible, persistent regions.
These are parts of the dynamical universe that exist.
They are completely stable.
They persist just like we do.
But they will never, ever be observed by our specific class of biological observers.
They are fully outside our reachable set.
So there are invisible islands of reality floating out there in the state space.
Entire dimensions or states of being that are stable, but utterly ghost-like to us.
Yes.
But, and this is theorem 13.3.
Perhaps the most elegant theorem in the text your reachable set isn't just a random arbitrary shape.
The boundary of what you can know is shaped by the exact same universal constraint field that defines those inaccessible regions.
Shaped how?
The boundary of your reachable set actually bends away from what you can't know.
It bends away, like physical pressure.
Mathematical pressure.
Flyxion calls this epistemic curvature.
The boundary of your knowledge is dented and deformed by the things you cannot see.
Okay, my brain is starting to melt a little bit, trying to visualize a dented boundary of knowledge.
Help me out.
Let's use the author's own brilliant analogy.
Dark matter.
When astrophysicists look at a distant galaxy spinning in space, it is spinning way, way too fast.
Based on all the visible light we can collect, the glowing stars, the gas clouds, the dust, there simply isn't enough physical mass to hold that galaxy together.
Based on the gravity of what we can see, the galaxy should fly apart into the void.
But it doesn't fly apart.
Exactly. It stays together, which means there is an unfathomable amount of mass there that we cannot see.
We call it dark matter.
It does not interact with the electromagnetic spectrum.
It doesn't absorb light.
It doesn't reflect light.
It is fundamentally physically residing in an inaccessible region of our observable states.
But we absolutely know it is there.
Why?
Because of gravity. Gravitational lensing.
Even if we can't see the dark matter, it has so much mass that it warps the fabric of space-time around it.
It bends the light of the stars we can see.
That is it. Exactly.
It deforms the visible universe.
We detect the unseen by measuring the geometric anomalies of the seen.
Flyxion takes this profound concept from astrophysics and applies it directly to epistemology, to the theomy of knowledge itself.
Wow.
Epistemological dark matter lies just beyond the boundary of our reachable set.
We can't see the truth itself, but we can mathematically detect its presence by measuring what Flyxion calls the Hessian matrix of our own observable constraints.
Okay, Hessian matrix. You're throwing some heavy calculus terms at me. What is that?
In calculus, a Hessian matrix basically helps you find the shape of a curve.
If you have a complex mathematical landscape, the Hessian matrix tells you if you are standing in a bowl or sitting on a saddle or standing on a peak.
It measures the curvature.
Okay.
Flyxion uses this idea to say we can look at the shape of what we can know and notice the mathematical dents in it.
But those anomalies prove something invisible is pushing against the boundary.
We can see that our scientific theories, our biological limitations, even our societal structures are bending and warping in ways that do not make logical sense unless there is a massive unseen constraint pushing against the boundary of our reality.
That is just, it's staggeringly profound.
I want to ask you, the listener, to pause and ponder this in the context of your own life, because this isn't just about high-level math.
This scales down to human experience.
It really does.
Think about the invisible boundaries of your personal reachable set.
Think about the things you literally cannot comprehend because of your specific upbringing, your neurobiology, your socioeconomic trajectory.
Those experiences, those truths of other people are outside your reachable set.
But how often do those completely invisible boundaries deform the shape of the things you do know?
Right.
How often do your beliefs, your political views, or your anxieties bend to accommodate a truth you can't even see?
We are all constantly navigating the gravitational pull of our own epistemological dark matter.
That is a stunningly empathetic way to personalize theorem 13.3, the unseen actively shapes the scene.
As Flyxion writes, empirical emptiness does not imply ontological absence.
Just because you cannot experience a state of reality, just because it doesn't register on your personal instruments, doesn't mean it isn't massive, real, and actively warping your trajectory through life.
Which perfectly sets up the grand finale of this paper, the ultimate unification.
Flyxion zooms out here at the end for a synthesis that ties everything we've talked about, from evolutionary biology to cognitive AI chips to astrophysics under one grand unified theory of constraint.
Yes.
This brings us to theorem 14.1, unification by constraint.
Flyxion argues that the sweeping diversity of the topics in this essay isn't just the author applying a loose poetic metaphor to three different scientific fields.
It's deeper than a metaphor.
It is the rigorous mathematical discovery that the entire universe, at its absolute bedrock, consists of just three fundamental things.
State space, dynamics, and constraints.
The board, the rules of movement, and the wall.
Exactly.
The arena, the motion, and the boundaries.
And from those three primal things, absolutely everything else is derived.
Persistence, the simple fact of a biological organism surviving the sieve, or a chemical loop avoiding destruction, is the only intrinsic objective truth of the universe.
It is ontological.
It exists independent of anyone watching it.
The heart pumps blood, makes noise, and adds weight whether I'm looking at it or not.
Yes.
But function, observation, knowledge, purpose, those are all dual projections.
Projections.
We are back to the coordinate systems and the constellations we talked about earlier.
They are epistemic projections.
They fundamentally require an embedded observer who is trapped inside their own reachable set, desperately trying to make sense of the tiny fibers of reality they are lucky enough to sample.
Which leads to the final devastating blow to our traditional worldview.
Propositions, 16.1, epistemology without privileged reality.
What does that mean for the scientist in the white coat?
What does it mean for our narrative of human progress toward absolute truth?
It means that the traditional scientific ideal, what philosophers call the view from nowhere, is mathematically impossible.
The dream of an observer who can perfectly, objectively capture reality in itself, free from bias or perspective, is a fantasy.
But why impossible?
I understand it's incredibly hard and humans are flawed, but why mathematically impossible?
Because of the cardinality of dynamical systems, think about what would be physically required for an observer to perfectly see the whole system without any projection, loss of information, or bias.
Their reachable set would have to be perfectly equal to the entire state space of the universe.
I'd have to be everywhere.
They would have to be able to physically visit and encompass every possible state of existence.
Furthermore, their observation map, that non-injective, lossy compression we talked about, would have to become perfectly injective.
No lost information.
A one-to-one map of reality.
You can't map the universe perfectly unless your map is exactly the same size and complexity as the universe itself.
Precisely. And if your map is the exact size and complexity of the universe, and you can visit every state, well, you aren't an observer anymore.
You would have to possess the exact cardinality and dynamics of the cosmos.
You would literally just be an exact duplicate of the universe.
You stop being a spectator and you become the arena.
Yes. Any genuine observer must, by definition, be finite, partial, and highly constrained.
This is not a failure of our technology.
It's not something we can fix with better AI or bigger telescopes.
It is a fundamental structural consequence of what it means to be a persistent subsystem.
I find this incredibly liberating, but also intensely humbling.
It means knowledge isn't a straight, triumphant line converging on an objective, monolithic truth with a capital T.
Not at all.
Knowledge is a highly specific, path-dependent trajectory.
You are an observer, surviving through a chaotic field of constraints, drawing coordinate systems on the stars to help yourself navigate the dark, and feeling the gravitational pull of massive truths you will never, ever reach.
It is the ultimate collapse of the distinction between being and knowing.
To be is to persist under constraint.
To know is to map what is reachable under that exact same constraint.
They aren't two different processes.
They are dual projections of the exact same underlying geometric field.
So, as we wrap up this deep dive, let's take a breath and summarize the immense ground we've covered today.
The narrative of progress is a comforting illusion.
Life isn't a sculptor optimizing toward perfection.
It is a blind sieve.
And you are simply a survivor of conditional inflation.
A sloppy chemical accident that managed to not fall through the floorboards.
The game show trapdoors.
Right.
The purpose of your organs, the functions of your brain.
They aren't intrinsic properties decreed by the cosmos.
They are your own useful projections.
Coordinate systems drawn on persistent structures.
And your scientific knowledge.
Your personal truth is not an absolute view from nowhere.
It is the traits of your unique, highly constrained trajectory through a universe far larger than you can ever possibly reach.
The world is always larger than any projection.
And the state space is always larger than any observer.
And I want to leave you with a final, unaddressed implication derived from the geometry of the unseen.
Something for you to mull over as you go about the rest of your day interacting with the people in your life.
I think this is the most important takeaway.
If every single observer is trapped in their own reachable set, shaped by their unique historical trajectory of constraints and structural blind spots, are you fundamentally isolated in your own epistemic island?
When you sit down across from a friend or a partner or stranger and you try to communicate with them, are you actually sharing a single objective reality?
Or are you simply measuring the epistemic curvature of their unreachable world as it gently brushes up against the boundary of your own?
You are detecting their dark matter.
We started today talking about how much we crave neat ladders of progress and clear objective goals.
But perhaps the muddy, constrained waters of our subjective reality aren't a mistake to be fixed.
They are the very geometry of the universe.
Thank you for joining us on this deep dive into the source material.
Keep questioning the constraints around you.
Keep looking for the dark matter in others.
And we'll see you next time.